Introduction

A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to.
Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.
They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project. Your role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. 
We be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

Project Description

This project will define the fact & the dimension tables for a star schema for a particular analytic focus, and write an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files od Song Dataset and Log Dataset in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL.

Implementation 

As Data Engineer at Sparkify I designed a star schema model to facilitate the processes of querying the data about the users on this music platform. 
1.	Description on file data sets:

a.	Song Dataset: Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song.

    •	File file : data/song_data/
    •	Sample file : TRABCEI128F424C983.json


b.	Log Dataset: This is the second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

    •	File file : data/log_data
    •	Sample file : 2018-11-12-events.json

2.	Create a pandas data frame and read the datasets.
3.	Using the song and log datasets, created a star schema for song play analysis. 

Schema for Song Play Analysis:

Fact Table
1.	songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
    •	songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
Dimension Tables
1.	users - users in the app
    •	user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
2.	songs - songs in music database
    •	song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
3.	artists - artists in music database
    •	artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
4.	time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
    •	start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

Example queries and results for song play analysis.
    •	Importing the libraries
    •	Connected to Postgres Database
    •	Defined get file function , to get all the required Json file based on parameter file bath
 
•	Processed Song_data
    •	Used the get_files function to get a list of all song JSON files in data/song_data
    •	Select the song in this list
    •	Read the song file and view the data

 
•	Extracted Data for Artists Table.
    •	Selected columns for artist ID, name, location, latitude, and longitude.
    •	Use df.values to select just the values from the dataframe.
    •	Index to select the first (only) record in the dataframe.
    •	Convert the array to a list and set it to artist_data.
 
 
•	Performed ETL on the second dataset, log_data, to create the time and users dimensional tables, as well as the songplays fact table.
    •	Used the get_files function provided above to get a list of all log JSON files in data/log_data
    •	Selected the first log file in this list
    •	Read the log file and view the data


•	Implemented the user_table_insert query in sql_queries.py and ran the cell below to insert records for the users in this log file into the users table. 
 

•	Implemented the song_select query in sql_queries.py to find the song ID and artist ID based on the title, artist name, and duration of a song.
    •	Selected the timestamp, user ID, level, song ID, artist ID, session ID, location, and user agent and set to songplay_data
    •	Insert Records into Songplays Table
    •	Implemented the songplay_table_insert query and run the cell below to insert records for the songplay actions in this log file into the songplays table



UNIT TESTING:

Run test.ipynb to confirm your records were successfully inserted into each table.
 

